Python strings have more than 30 built in methods that allow us to manipulate and parse them.
In this section, we are going to learn about some of the most important ones, and we will start this
lecture by learning about the index method.
As you know, a string is a sequence of characters and each character has an ordered position within
that sequence.
If we take the example hello, the letter H occupies index zero.
Python always starts an index at position zero, so always pay attention to this when counting e occupies
index one L occupies index to the second L occupies index three and zero occupies index for empty spaces
and punctuation marks also occupy a place in the sequence.
So if we had a string say hello world it would look like this and there is more in Python.
We can also identify the position of a character using the reverse index, which also starts at zero
for the first character, but then starts from the right side with the negative one index and works
its way down to meet to zero on the left.
And this is where the index method comes in.
It will help us know two things.
On one hand, knowing in which position a certain character is located.
Let's suppose I have the variable my text which contains the string.
Hello.
And I want to know in which position the letter E is.
In this case we tell python that in variable my text.
I want to know the index of the character.
E.
If I write in this way, Python will tell me that the E is at index one.
On the other hand, if I want to know which character is at a certain position, this is even easier
to write.
Just write the variable name.
And between square braces, the index of interest.
In this case Python will tell me the letter O is the one that resides there.
There are many more details to learn about index, but let's see them in pi term.
Let's see how the index behaves in pi charm.
And for that I've already created a folder here called Day three.
We're going to inaugurate this day's lectures with a file called Index, which is what we're going to
start working on right now.
And we're going to start by creating a variable called my text.
This is a variable that is going to contain the string that we're going to work with throughout this
lecture.
We're going to make a string that says this text is a.
I'm going to create another variable called result and which I'm going to do my tests with the index
method.
We're going to make result to be equal to the variable, my text and we're going to open the square
brackets to put the index zero here.
This means that I want result to store the value of what there is in the index.
Zero of the variable.
My text.
Let's try to guess what we will get before executing it.
Remember that we start counting from index zero.
So in the string the text is a test.
The capital letter t is the one we should find in the index.
Zero.
Let's print it out so we can say on the console.
And what we're going to print here is result.
All right, let's run it.
And here we have exactly the result.
We expected the letter capital t.
Let's keep trying different alternatives to see how this works.
If I, for example, want to print whatever is in index seven.
You do your math.
I'm going to run it to discover that the x this x here is the one at index seven.
Let's count together zero one, two, three, four, five, six and seven.
That's correct.
Let's also try doing it with negative numbers.
We said that we can put a negative number like minus three.
And Python will count from left to right.
Remember, zero is always going to be the first index, but then minus one, minus two and minus three.
Here, it should give us the letter E, and indeed we have the letter E with the minus three.
This is how you get the character that inhabits a certain index that you can decide to query.
But now let's do the opposite.
We're going to say what is in the character we've found, and we want to know what index it is in.
For that, we're going to say that the result is equal to my text.
And this time we're going to add here a method that belongs to all strings.
And since my text is a variable that contains a string, it has all the string method.
Simply put a dot here and observe that pie chart displays a whole list with all the methods that we
dispose for our strings.
This circle with an m means that it is a method, and here is index.
This is the method we're interested in.
So we're going to accept.
Here we get this contextual window that gives us some help that says that this method has three possible
parameters.
The first one is a substring, which would be the character or the word that we are going to look for.
Then we have two optional parameters, which is from where and to where we want to search, but we're
going to look at that later.
Now, let's just look at the first parameter, which is the substring.
We're going to start by looking for the letter H in quotes.
We have a letter H here in this text is a test, and if we run it, it's going to tell us that it's
at index number one.
And that's correct.
The T is zero and H is one.
But what happens if we look for a letter that doesn't exist in our string?
Let's try it with A with a Q.
We execute it and it throws an exception.
It tells us that we have a value error.
That's the type of our error.
A value error.
The substring was not found.
Let's also search for whole words.
If I search for the word text, it tells me that text does exist and that this substring starts at index
five, which is the one corresponding to the first t of text.
It doesn't give us the index of each of the letters of text, but only the one where the substring starts.
And of course, if we were to write it wrong, let's write text.
It will throw the same exception as before.
Also the index is case sensitive.
So if I search for h, but this time as a capital letter which does not exist in our string, it will
also give me the same error.
Now let's search for a letter that is repeated several times, such as S, for example.
What happens if I search for S?
Well, the result will be three.
This means that it has told me where the first SE was found because it did the search from left to right.
And once it found an S it stopped there and can no longer know if there is still other S's ahead.
This is a feature of index that only searches from left to right and stops when it finds the the first
result.
But we also have, as I showed you before, other parameters for index that can help us a little with
this.
If I put a comma after the substring parameter, I can add an index from where it is going to start
searching.
So let's say I search from index five and execute.
Now it tells me that s is an index 11.
And why is that?
Because it didn't include the first one, which is at the index three.
It skipped it because it started counting from index five, which is this letter T.
So five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, 11.
This is the sgh that returns.
We also have the possibility to say how far we want the search to go.
So if I add a comma here and I add that third parameter, I want to search up the character number 11.
Well, now it gives me an error because although there are three SW letters in my string, I asked it
to search from five, which is this t up to 11, which we know is precisely this letter s.
But here we have a learning curve.
It is not inclusive.
That is the number you choose as the third parameter to indicate how far you want to go with the search.
It will not be included.
So keep this in mind when you build your searches.
In our case, in this range, from here to here, there is no SW and that's why it returned an error.
Now let's delete our index method because I want to show you another alternative, which is actually
a different method, but it is very similar to index.
So let's put the dot here one more time and notice that we have the index method.
It's very similar, but the difference is that it searches backwards.
That is, it searches from right to left.
So if I put the letter S here, what it will do is it will search from right to left and it will return
17, which is this s the first one it found and it returns it with the index that goes from left to
right, not to the index that would give me minus one.
Okay.
So this is an alternative to doing searches with index.
And that's about all for the index method.
So let's keep going now because the day is just beginning.
I'll see you in the next lecture.